Introduction Cassava ( Manihot spp) is a dicotyledono us plant belonging to the family Euphobiaceae. Cassava is a root crop u nlike yam ( Diosiorca spp) that is a tuber crop. It is native to Central America. Cassava was introduced to West Africa by Portuguese explorers in the 16 th and 17th centuries. In Nigeria, it was introduced at Warri, Yenagoa, Calabar and Owerri about the same time. It is an important food staple and industrial crop in Nigeria. Cassava is also important as a major source of income for rural households. Nigeria is currently the largest producer of cassava in the world wit h an annual production of over 54tons from an estimated land area of 1.4 million hectares. The crop’s production generally requires less labour per unit of output than other major staple crops in Nigeria. It can grow and give reasonable yields in relatively poor soil and low rainfall area s. Owing to these attributes it has become a critical food security crop in Nigeria. Cassava has underground roots that are consumed by man after processing. A few varieties exist that can be eaten raw. The root is also rich in carbohydrates and readily fed to livestock’s . In recent times, government has encouraged the processing of the crop into a wide range of industrial products such as ethanol, glue, poultry feed, glucose syrup and bread. The demands for these products are on the increase and Government’s interest in cassava resea rch is also increasing with strong emphasis on increase d productivity and diversification of uses. Average yield of 5-9t/ha i n farmers’ field indicates that the crop is poorly managed as both demonstrated potential and experimental yields are 400% and 250 % respectively above farmers’ yields. These could be attributed to inadequate information that accrues from use of low yielding planting materials, pest and diseases and poor farming practices by farmers . The purpose of this bulletin is to highlight recommendations from research for high cassava yield, efficient processing and utilization in Nigeria. SITE SELECTION Cassava tolerates poor soils usually unsuitable for most other crop like maize. It produces some yield even when abandoned without adequate management. For high yield of tubers, cassava requires well-drained and deep soil that is not stony or gravelly. It can also thrive in poor soils (marginal soils). PRODUCTION Production Inputs The essential materials needed for optimum production of cas sava include;  Land  Planting material (cassava stem cuttings) of appropriate varieties  Capital  Labour  Agro-chemicals e.g herbicides, inorganic and organic fertilizers  Farm tools e.g hoe, cutlass, knife, or saw, plough, harrow, ridger, tractor, and wheelbarrow.  Technical know-how (Technology) Processing Inputs These are tools used for processing cassava tubers into various forms for utilization. These include;  Material e.g knives and machines (where available)  Washing equipments (bowls and machines where available)  Graters (manual or machines)  Dewatering facilities – sticks or machines (manual or mechanical (where available)  Toasters-manual or mechanical (where available) Transportation Inputs  Lorries, trucks, rail, marine transportation, donkeys etc  Motorcycles, bicycle etc 1 2 1 2 

 Wheel barrows Marketing Inputs These are materials used for distributing and marketing cassava products, namely;  Stores  Bags  Basins  Markets (buyers and sellers)  Consumers Land Preparation Good production requires good land preparations which depend on:  Climate  Soil type  Vegetation  Topography  Good management practices Traditionally after clearing the forest in rainforest ecological zone of Nigeria, no land preparation is required other than the removal of shrubs vines, and cutting off branches of large trees to admit sunlight. As soon as the rain is established, farmers loosen the soil with a hoe, planting stick, or sharp instrument before placing the cassava cuttings and cover back with soil. Good seed bed preparation is necessary in cassava production. In the west, south and eastern agro -ecological zones land preparation is carried out between March to early May while in the Northern part it is done in early June to July. Before planting the land is c leared, raked and do controlled burning of the trash es if the trash is too much to b e handled or spray with herbicide if it is mainly grass vegetation . Alternatively, after bush clearing and burning, farmers usually practice stumping in the forest vegetation. After creating a good soil environment, the land is prepared into;  Ridges and mounds up to 30 - 60 cm high  Deep plough to soil depth (25 – 30cm).  Harrow to fine tilt  Make 1 meter ridges  Make tied mounds in a straight line.  Flat with loosening of the spots with hoe, cutlass or spade Ridging or mounding is essential in soils which are hard, shallow or poorly drained. Ridging facilitates root penetration, root development and farm operations like ferti lizer application and weeding as well as harvesting (Fig. 1). Making ridges or mounds across the slope and in valleys bottom help to control water logging and erosion since ridges and mounds are usually higher than both the permanent and temporary water fables. Fig. 1. Land prepared in ridges Recommended Cassava Varieties Use of poor yielding varieties has been a major factor contributing to the low yields in farmers’ fields. Varieties have been bred and selected based on outstanding attributes like root yield, pests and diseases resistance/tolerance, high dry matter and food qual ity. The following cassava varieties and their characteristics are presented in Table s 1a and 1b 3 4 3 4 

Table 1 a. VARIETIES OF CASSAVA AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS Cassav a variety Branchi ng habit Canopy developm ent Ecologic al adaptati on Pests & disease resistan ce Fres h Roo t Yiel d Dry Matt er Yield 80(c m) Gar ri Yiel d (%) Starc h Yield (%) Hcn in Product s (mg/100 g) TMS 90257 Profuse Moderate Wide High 43 25 23 23 15.5 TMS 84537 Moderat e Sparse Wide High 35 28 18 27 6.3 TMS 82/000 56 Profuse Moderate Wide High 35 28 21 26 6.4 TMS 82/006 61 Profuse Moderate Wide High 39 30 22 26 4.1 NR 8212 Profuse Moderate Wide High 27 37 25 21 High NR 8082 Profuse Profuse Wide High 32 32 22 19 High TMS 50395 Moderat e Moderate Wide Moderat e 36 29 24 12 High TMS 3001 Moderat e Moderate Wide Moderat e 16 28 23 22 Low NR 8208 Profuse Moderate Wide Moderat e 26 32 25 23 High NR 8083 Profuse Moderate Wide High 31 43 36 25 High TMS 81/001 10 Profuse Moderate Wide High 28 31 24 25 4.5 TMS 91934 Moderat e Sparse Wide Moderat e 32 34 26 21 High TMS 30572 Profuse Profuse Wide Moderat e 27 34 25 24 750 TMS 4(2)14 25 Moderat e Profuse Savanna Moderat e 26 36 25 22 31 TMS 30555 Moderat e Profuse Wide Moderat e 17 32 24 20 High NR 83107 Profuse Moderate Wide High 22 31 22 19 High NR 41044 Moderat e Profuse Forest Moderat e 37 34 25 23 High Source: FMANR (1997) Table 1b. New Cassava Varieties CASSAVA VARIETY PEDIGREE DAYS OF MATU RITY POTENT IAL POST YIELD PLANT HEIGHT BRANCHES TME 419 Gbase koute op 12 35.2 t/ha Tall (3-4m) Not appreciable TMS 97/2205 TMS 30 572 x TME 6 12 31.8 t/ha Moderate in height (about 2m) Low (about 0.5m) TMS 98/0505 9+DTP REP 2 bulk 12 45.5 t/ha Moderate in height (about 2m) Low (about 0.5m) TMS 98/0510 97 DTP REP 2 bulk 12 37.5 t/ha Moderate in height (about 2.5m) Moderately high (about 1.2m) TMS 98/0581 MPR POP 1 bulk 12 47.3 t/ha Tall (about 3m) 0.5-1.0m TMS 92/0057 (TMS 30555 X TME 1) HS 12 30.7T/Ha Tall (2-3m) Low (1.0-1.3m) TMS 92/0326 (PMS 91934 X TME 1)HS 10-12 39.5 t/ha Tall (2-3m) Low (0.7-2.6m) TMS 96/1632 TMS 94/0325 X TME 7 12 43.2 t/ha Tall (about 3m) High (about 1.5m) TMS 98/002 97 DTP REP 1 10-12 48.4 t/ha Moderate in height (2m) Low (about 0.5m) NR 87184 83 DTP REP 1 10-12 34.6 t/ha Tall about (3m) Low (0.1-1.1m) Pro-Vit A Umucass’ eries 8-12 35.4 t/ha Moderate in height (about 2.5m) Source NRCRI (2000) Climate and Soil Requirement Cassava requires a temperature of 21 oC-35oC, rainfall of 150 -200 cm, a well-drained, rich, friable, loamy soil. It can also grow in poor soil. 5 6 

Planting Materials Cassava can flower and also produce seeds but the seeds are not currently being used for planting. It is the stem -called cuttings that are planted. The use of cutting is sometimes regarded as vegetative propagation of cassava. The seeds of cassava are mainly being used to breed new varieties. Ensure that you select the variety suitable to your location which also has the desired attributes. The quality and yield of cassava depends on the quality of the sticks or cuttings and variety planted, the management practice adopted and the locality where it has been planted. It is advised that cuttings should be obtained from reliable source. Cassava stem or cutting quality depends on:-  Age of stem:- The best cuttings for planting are obtained from plants 6 – 12 months old.  Thickness:- Recommended pith diameter is equal to or less than 50% of the stem.  Health of Stems: - Ensure that stems are healthy and good sprouting and establishment.  Number of Nodes:-Cut stem such that each cutting has about 5 – 7 nodes.  Stem Portion:- Middle portions establish better than the tips and basal portions.  Stem Storage:- Store c assava stems under shade for 4 - 10 days before cutting and planting. This processes makes stem sprout faster than if planted immediately when freshly cut from the field. Planting Date The best time to plant cassava has been established for the vario us ecological zone at the on -set of the first rains of the year and it depends on the cropping systems . However, cassava is planted between March and October in all the agro -ecological zones. Except Northern zones of Nigeria, planting is done between May and July to ensure that cuttings are well established before the on -set of dry season. These covers the period usually described as the rainy season in all zones. It is however known that in the tropical rainforest zone, cassava can be grown all year round. The determining factor is the availability of water. Even in the drier savanna, cassava can be grow n all year round using irrigation. Although cassav a is drought resistant/tolerant and can withstand 6 months of drought after establishment. Method of Planting Planting of cassava cuttings could be vertical, slanti ng (at an angle) or horizontal ( Fig. 2 ). Vertically planting of cassava cuttings is not recommended as this method encourage drying of cuttings and usually has poor root development and establishment. The best recommended method is slanting or horizontal. By this method 2/3 of cuttings are buried and planted at inclined angle of about 45 0 and ensure that the buds point upwards from where the stem sprouts . While in horizontal method all the cuttings are buried and covered with soil which always give rise to more than two sprouting. Where it becomes necessary to plant later than the recommended time and to eliminate dipping stakes in insecticides against cassava mealy bug ( CMB) and cassava green spider mite (C GM), bury the cuttings completely in the soil (horizontally) at a depth of about 5 cm. Deep planting makes harvesting difficult and increases production costs. In dry sandy soils plant cassava cuttings deep; in moist and heavy soils, plant shallow. Fig. 2. Planting methods Source: IITA 7 8 

Spacing Cassava cuttings are planted at 1m x 1m spacing either on flats, ridges or mounds. Due to erect (n one branching ) property of some variety like. TME 419 spacing can be as close as 100cm x 75cm ap art to give a higher plant population/ha. Seed Rate and Plant Population It is recommended to plant cassava stems one meter apart with 50 stems of 1 m each of 50 bundles of stem cuttings per ha . This gives a plant population of 10,000 stands per hectare. This spacing is convenient and practicable both for mechanization and inter-cropping. Cropping Pattern Cassava can be grown as a sole crop. It can also be grown (intercropped) with principal staples, such as yam, cocoyam, sweet potato, maize, melon, cowpea, soybean and plantain. Cassava can also be grown with permanent crops like oil palm, rubber, cashew and cocoa within the first few years of the establishment before the ir canopies cover and the permanent crops fully take over. Weed Management Cassava yield is usually reduced by delay of weed control. Slow initial growth and development make the cassava very susceptible to weed interference during the first 3 -4 months after plan ting. Uncontrolled weed growth in cassava reduces the yield by 80 % /ha loss which could result to a monetary l oss of up to N30,000.00. Weeds must be controlled during the first 8 – 12 weeks from planting. This period is referred to as “the critical period of weed interference”. Any of or combination of the following methods can be used to control weeds in cassava.  Cultural method  Biological method  Genetic method  Chemical method  Integrated method Cultural Method This involves using of Hoe or any local tools as well as hand pulling to control weed and is very effective in a small farms. It is done at 4, 8 and 12 weeks after planting. After this period, the canopies of the cassava have fully developed and covered the ground to smother the weeds. Slashing may be done if necessary before harvesting. Biological Method This method makes use of “in situ” live mulch in the form of cover crop. By this way, cover crops such as egusi, cowpea, sweet potato, mucuna, groundnut and soybean grown durin g the season prior to cassava cultivation help to suppress weeds. Cassava cuttings can be planted directly into the mulch cover with little or no land clearing. Appropriate inter crops can significantly reduce weeding frequencies and weed intensity. Interc ropping with leguminous species ( cowpea, groundnut and soybean ) has the additional benefits of soil improvement and fixing of nitrogen in the soil. Genetic Method Use of Early-Branching Varieties:- Early-branching varieties develop canopies which reduce weed growth when:  Sprouts are vigorous,  Crops are weed free in the first 3 -4 months due to short growth with good canopy from the branches  Plant density is higher than 10,000 plants/ha  Plants are free from disease and pests due to high genetic make up.  Environment and soil fertility are favourable. Weed competition reduces branches, canopy and root development as well as overall crop yield. Yield reduction varies from 40% in early - branching cultivars to 70% in late or non -branching cultivars. When canopies do not provide sufficient cover, weed problems become 9 10 

severe. Weed s also can habour disease organisms and pests that predispose the crop to subsequent infections. Weeds like Imperatacylindrica (spear grass) not only compete for resources, but also pierce c assava roots and create entry points for rot-causing pathogen. The early branching varieties effectively suppress early weed growth at the time when the cassava plant is vulnerable to weed competition during the first 3 -4 months of crop growth due to good canopy produced from the branches. Chemical Method Several pre -emergency herbicides have been identified for weed control in sole cassava farms.  Fluometuron at 2.0 kg ai/ha  Diuron at 3.0 kg ai/ha  Chloramben at 1.5-3kg ai/ha (as the case may be).  Formulated mixture of flumeturon + metolachlor (2 + 2 kg/ha)  Metobromuron and metolachlor (2 + 2 kg/ha)  Fluometuron and Pendimethalin ( 2 + 2 kg/ha)  Primextra (Pre-mix of Atrazine + Metolachlor (2 – 3 kg/ha) The following pre-emergence herbicides can equally be used in mixed cassava plots  Diorun + Paraquat at 4-5 l/ha  Pumetra at 4-5 l/ha Herbicides are most effective when applied before weed emergence in the field. When planting or weed control is dela yed such th at weeds become visible, mix p ost-mergence her bicide with a systemic herbicide such as Glyphosate. By this way, the contact herbicide will take care of the already emerged weeds. Herbicides are cost effective when available in appropriate quantities, and when cassava fields are too large to be weeded by hand (manual). Integrated Weed Management This is the control of weeds through a long -term management approach, using a combination of weed management techniques such as physical control, chemical control, biochemical control or cultural control. Th is method reduces the chances of weed species being adapted to a particular control technique, which is likely to occur if only one technique is used. For an example, if a herbicide is used over a long period of time, a weed species can build up a resistan ce to the chemical. Examples of integrated weed management include;  Combining one hand weeding with the use of an improved variety, planted at optimum density.  Combining a pre-emergence herbicide with late weeding. Fertilizer and Fertilizer Application Cassava has an extensive root sy stem and uses plant nutrients which are not easily accessible to other crops. In traditional farming, farmers can obtain yields of up to 5.6t/ha without fertilizer on soil that would not support other crops. Any compound ferti lizer – NPK 15:15:15, 20:10:10; 25: 10:10, 27:13:13 or any other planting. Applying ring form around the cassava stands. One match box full of fertilizer is enough for one stand of cassava. One level of standard (normal) peak milk container is enough for five stands of cassava and these are equivalent to 400kg/ha of NPK (15:15:15 or 10:10:20 (8 bags) which is ideal or recommend ed for a normal/standard soil. However, for good yield of roots from a fairly rich soil, Table 1 shows the number of bags /ha of vario us compound fertilizers per hectare. 11 12 

Table 2. Compound Fertilizer for Cassava (bags/ha) FERTILIZERS (NPK) 15:15:15 20:10:10 25:10:10 27:13:13 Bags/ha 12 9 7 6 ½ = 6 ½ Two or three tons per hectare of poultry , cattle manure can also be applied for good yield of cassava roots in the absence or combination of chemical fertilizer. For good growth and yields, cassava requires friable, light textured and well drained soils containing sufficient moisture and a balanced amount of plant nutrients . However, farmers can produce up to 1.4 – 7.4 t/ha across all the agro -ecological zones in Nigeria and research has shown that yields of 40-60 t/ha are possible. Pests and Diseases Pest of Cassava: - Cassava is affected by a number of pests. These include:-  Variegated grasshopper:- This causes complete defoliation of the cassava plant by eating up the leaves and young stems at adult and nymph stages of the insect life. Regular weeding and hand picking are among the control measures. (Plate 1). Spraying the crop and the surrounding bush with 30ml (6 tea spoonful) (2 gallons) of water as soon as the first nymphs are observed towards the end of September provided effective control. For very effective and total control, get surrounding farmers to do same.  Vertebrate Pests:- Rats, grasscutters (can rat) and bush fowls dig up and eat cassava roots. Control:-  Keep the farm and surroundings weed free  Trapping  Shooting with gun  Wire fencing round the farm (where practicable).  White Ants and Termites:- Dip cassava stem cuttings in a solution of chloropyrifos insecticides for 5 minutes at the rate of 2 mls to 1ltre of water and allow to dry before planting.  This “seed” treatment will also control cassava mealy bug, green spider mite and millipedes. Destroy ant hills . Spray the destroyed ant hills with Agrothion (Fenitrothion) 20 at the rate of 40 ml/4.5 litres of water and 9 litres/ant hill.  Green Spider Mite (GSM) These cause damages to the leaves thereby reducing the photosynthctic ability of the plant resulting in eventual yield reduction. They (spider mites) can also act as vectors for transferring diseases from on plant to another. Isolated cases can be treated by spraying with 0.1% (1 table spoonful/4.5 litres of water) solution of Perfekthion 40 or Rogir 40. Where the cassava is young (less than four (4) months old and at the on set of dry season, treat with foliar spicy of 0.1% (1 tablespoonful/4.5 litre of water) solution of the following chemicals:-  Supracide for Ultracide; Rogor or Perfekthion (Diamethoate); Diazinon or Dasudin; Azodrin or Nuvacron (monocrotophos). Start spraying as soon as the symptons are noticed. Repeat 4 times at 2 weekly intervals. Diseases Cassava is known to be attacked by more than 30 diseases, but the following are the important cassava diseases in Nigeria:- a) African Cassava Mosaic Disease (ACMD):- This disease is caused by virus which is transmitted by a piercing and sucking insect known as white flies. Symptoms:- The symptoms include vein cleaning, distortion of the leaves and stunted growth of the plants. Control:- - Grow resistant varieties - Uproot and burn infected plants 13 14 

- Use diseases free planting materials b). Bacterial Blight:- It is caused by b acteria which are transmitted when infected cuttings are used Symptoms:- These incl ude; angular and water soaked area of discoloured leaf tissue, blighting, wilting and general reduction in yield. Control:- - Use resistant varieties - Use clean and disease from stem cutting. c) Leaf Spot:- It is caused by a fungus Symptoms:- This includes spots which produce pale, brownish colour on affected leaves. Control:- - Spray with fungicide e.g Bordeaux mixture, Benlate (Benomyl), Dithane m45 and myloxls d) Cassava Root Rot Diseases:- These are caused by various kinds of fungi living on or in the soil. The f ungi occur mainly in poorly drained soils. Symptoms:- The leaves on cassava plants affected by root rot diseases turn brown, wilt, and the plant appears scotched. The disease kills both feeder and storage roots of cassava. The affected storage roots have a n unusual and develop colouration mainly common in over mature cassava field. Controls:- - Use resistant varieties - Use clean and disease free stem cuttings - Avoid flooded field - Avoid late harvesting Cropping System Cassava is commonly planted s ole, but also intercropped with many other crops. These are various combinations of cassavas base enterprises The combinations includes:- - Yam/maize/cassava - Yam/maize/cassava/okra - Cassava/maize/egusi - Maize/cassava/cowpea - Yam/maize/cassava/plantain In these intercropping combination systems, cassava is usually planted as last crop due to its longer maturity period than other crops. Maturity Cassava is ready for harvest at 9 – 12 months after planting depending on the variety and location (Fig.3). Harvest when the soil is moist so as to minimize damage to the tubers. Cut the stem 30cm above the soil surface and lift roots by pulling the stump gently. Cassava can be harvested both in the raining and dry season, but it is better to harvest when the soil is wet, to avoid damag e to the roots, and also to use the stem cutting for new planting. Cassava harvested soon after the drought season loses much starch. Best yields under rain fed are obtained from mature crops after 3 months from the end of dry season. Fig. 3. Matured plant ready for harvest Harvesting Cassava is due for harvesting when tuberous roots have accumulated sufficient amount of starch (Fig. 4 ). W hen harvesting is unduely delayed the tubers became woody or fibrous. Time of harvesting depends on; 15 16 

- Time of planting - Variety planted - Climatic and soil factors - Marketing demand - Farmers needs Generally, cassava tubers are harvested manually by hand pulling and digging using hoe, cutlass or spade after cutting of the stems (Fig. 4). For several reasons, it is difficul t to harvest all the cassava in a plot because of several factors like spoilage, hence only the quantity required immediately for use should be harvested. Cassava tubers rapidly spoil after harvesting because it does not store well once uprooted. Mechanical harvesters are available to uproot tuberous roots, which are then picked by hand. Harvesting is easier when the soil is moist and if planting on ridges or in roles in a loose or sandy soils, rather than on flat ground and in clay or heavy soils. Fig. 4. Harvesting of cassava tubers Storage of Roots After harvesting where it cannot be processed immediately c over cassava roots with jute bags and sprinkle water on it to keep moist and store for 2 – 4 days before processing. Cassava root s stored longer than this period does not produced good quality products because there are black steaks formed inside the roots. This changes the colour of the products. PROCESSING AND UTILIZATION Cassava is a very versatile commodity with num erous uses and by products. The roots are generally processed into different food forms for human consumption and industrial uses as well as livestock feed . The stem serves as yam staking and source of fire wood. The leaves are consumed as vegetables in many tropical countries. Uses and Utilization Uses and utilization of cassava produce are listed as;  Gari  Foofoo  Flour  Tapioca  Cassava chips  Glucose syrup  Glue  Ethanol  Bread  Livestock feed  Starch Hygiene and Quality Products Fresh cassava tuber is a high wa ter (moist), low -acid food that is highly susceptible to bacterial and fungal growth. Hygienic practices, especially in the early stages of processing, should therefore ensure minimal contamination. All waste materials from the process should be removed fr om the site as they are produced to avoid the risk of cross-contamination. Washing should be carried out thoroughly to avoid contamination of the final product with pect, sand and so on. Formulation must be properly controlled, as too short a period will result in incomplete detoxification and a bland product, while too long a period will give the product a strong sour taste. Both ‘over’ – and ‘under’ – formulation badly affect the texture of the final garri. 17 18 

If too much liquid is pressed from the grated c assava, the gelatinization of starch during subsequent toasting is affected and the product is whiter. If sufficient liquid is not removed, the formation of granules during toasting is affected and the dough is more likely to form into lumps. The ideal moisture content is 47 – 50% and this is assessed visually by experienced garri producers. Sieving is important to obtain a high – quality product, free of fibrous contaminants and with similar -sized granules. The granules must be toasted to about 80 0C/1750F to achieve partial gelatinization of the starch. If lower temperatures are used, the product simply dries and produces a dry white powder. Too high temperatures will cause charring of the product and make it stick to the toasting pan. Processing Of Cassava Cassava roots contain 70% (or more) water and therefore cannot store for more than 3 -4 days after harvesting. Both the roots and leaves contain cyanide (HCN) and are therefore not eaten without processing except the sweet cassava variety. Cassava is a reliable food security crop. It is a crop that is extensively used in trade. Cassava processing essentially involves the conversion of the fresh root into other forms acceptable to consumers. There are numerous ways of processing and consuming cassava depen ding on locality. The successes achieved by increasing yields in cassava production requires to be adequately matched with increasing processing of cassava roots into various food forms since cassava roots are liable to high deterioration. Cassava processi ng is a step by step task employed during the conversion of cassava roots into various products. They include: a. Sorting/selection of raw material: Matured and wholesome roots should be selected for processing as this has a direct impact on the product yield and quality. b. Peeling: This eliminates the peel (the inedible portion) which is usually high in fiber and may contain certain anti-nutritional factors. c. Washing: This is aimed at eliminating dirt and other extraneous matter. d. Grating: This unit operation is used for size reduction. It helps to free the moisture, break the cell walls of the crops and initiates enzymes reactions e. Chipping: This unit operation is for size reduction. It makes use of a manual or motorized slicer or chipper. In manual chipping th e roots should be thinly sliced to facilitate the drying process. f. Drying: This unit operation is used to reduce the mois ture content of the processed crop. The operation is done using solar heat or mechanical dryers such as flash dryer or cabinet drier (Plate B) g. Frying: This provide means of frying the filtered product to gari using oven (Plate C). h. Packaging: In packaging, adequat e packaging material is necessary to avoid moisture and extraneous materials uptake from the storage environment (Plate D). i. Storage: Storage rooms should be well ventilated, of low humidity and free from insects and rodents. Plate A. Cassava grating machine 19 20 

 Plate B. hydraulic press for drying Plate C. Frying cassava into gari Plate D. Bagging of gari for storing 21 22 

 FRESH CASSAVA ROOTS Peeling Washing Grating Dewatering Pulverizing Drying (sun-drying or flash-drying) HIGH QUALITY CASSAVA FLOUR (HQCF) Fig. 5. Flow chart for High Quality Cassava Flour Production (HQCF) 23 

CASSAVA STARCH Fresh Cassava Root Tubers Peeling Washing Grating/Rasping Chipping Grinding Cassava Mash Mix with water Sieving Sedimenting Starch washing Drying (Drying (sun-drying or flash-drying) Dried cassava starch Milling Fig. 6. Flow chart for Starch Production (HQCF) FINE STARCH FLOUR 24 

 FRESH CASSAVA ROOTS Peeling Washing Chipping Fresh Cassava Chips Drying (Drying (sun-drying or flash-drying) DRIED CASSAVA CHIPS Fig. 7. Flow chart of Cassava Chips Production 25 

Fresh Cassava Root Tubers Peeling Washing Grinding (Mix with oil or without oil) Pressing Sieving Starch Toasting GARRI Fig. 8. Flow chart for processing Garri 26 

 FRESH CASSAVA ROOT TUBERS Peeling Un-peeled Tubers Washing Soaking in Water (Fermentation) Washing with clean water Removal of the back of Un-peeled root washing with clean water Sieve with clean water Allow to settle for about 10mins and remove the topmost water (Decantation) Bagging/Pressing AKPU (FUFU) Fig. 9. Flow chart for processing Akpu (Fufu) 27 

CONSTRAINTS IN (TRADITIONAL) CASSAVA PROCESSING:- A. Environmental Factors:- - During the raining season, the sunshine and temperature are low for processing and drying in the humid areas. - In the savannah zone, acute shortage of water hinders cassava processing which usually requires a lot of water. - The dry matter content is usually lower in the early rainy season than in the dry season therefore resulting in seasonal yield differences. - During the dry season when the dry matter is highest, the soil is too hard for harvesting resulting in lot of breakages/damages and high labour cost. B. Varietal Factors:- The root shapes and sizes resulting from differences in cassava varieties result in differences in harvesting and peeling times. Irregular shapes result in losses during peeling. Small roots consume more labour during peeling. Differences in dry matter and starch content resulting from different varieties affect quality of processed material. Dif ferent cassava varieties have different cyanide contents. Bitter cassava varieties have higher cyanide content than the sweet varieties. C. Agronomic Factors:- - Time of planting, harvesting and age of cassava at harvesting affect the starch, root yield and quality of product. D. Socio Economic Factors:- - Difficulties in harvesting especially during dry season affect labour availability and cost. - Transportation difficulties due to lack of good roads and none availability of vehicles result in high transport costs fr om the farm to the markets or collection centers. - Lack of processing machines and none availability of spare parts plus high fuel costs affect processing costs. - Non availability of ready labour due to immigration results in high labour costs in the cassava value chain. Packaging and Storage The product is hygroscopic (it absorbs moisture from the air) and should be packed in airtight moisture-proof bags, especially in areas of high humidity, to prevent spoilage due to mould growth. Channel of Marketing Cassava Produce This refers to all the linkages or pathways through which cassava produce have to pass through before they get to the final consumers. The Cassava Value Chain Fig 10: Represents the cassava value chain. This refers to all the linkages or pa thways through which cassava produce have to pass through before they get to the final consumer 28 29

Cassava pest and disease control, by target

Control of cassava mosaic disease. Cassava mosaic disease is caused by a virus transmitted by whiteflies. There is NO chemical treatment for cassava mosaic disease. No spray, insecticide or fungicide will cure it, because it is a virus inside the plant. The control measures for cassava mosaic disease are to grow resistant varieties, to uproot and burn infected plants, and to use disease-free planting materials. If you have cassava mosaic disease, do not buy chemicals for it.

Control of cassava bacterial blight. Cassava bacterial blight is caused by bacteria transmitted through infected cuttings. There is NO chemical treatment for cassava bacterial blight. Fungicides do not work on bacteria. The control measures for cassava bacterial blight are to use resistant varieties and to use clean, disease-free stem cuttings.

Control of cassava root rot disease. Cassava root rot is caused by fungi living in poorly drained soil. The control measures for cassava root rot are to use resistant varieties, use clean and disease-free stem cuttings, avoid flooded fields, and avoid late harvesting. No spray is recommended for root rot.

Control of cassava leaf spot. Cassava leaf spot is caused by a fungus and produces pale brownish spots on affected leaves. Leaf spot is the one cassava disease for which a fungicide is recommended. To control cassava leaf spot, spray with a fungicide such as Bordeaux mixture, Benlate (Benomyl) or Dithane M45. These fungicides are for leaf spot only. Do not use them for cassava mosaic disease or cassava bacterial blight.

Control of green spider mite on cassava. Green spider mites damage cassava leaves and reduce yield, and can carry disease between plants. To control green spider mite, isolated cases can be sprayed with a 0.1 percent solution of Perfekthion 40 or Rogor 40, which is one tablespoonful in 4.5 litres of water. On young cassava under four months old at the onset of the dry season, treat with a 0.1 percent foliar spray of Supracide or Ultracide, Rogor or Perfekthion (dimethoate), Diazinon or Dasudin, or Azodrin or Nuvacron (monocrotophos). Start spraying as soon as symptoms are noticed and repeat four times at two week intervals. These sprays are for green spider mite only. Do not use them for cassava mosaic disease or cassava bacterial blight.

Control of white ants and termites on cassava. To control white ants and termites, dip cassava stem cuttings in a chloropyrifos insecticide solution for five minutes at two millilitres per litre of water and allow to dry before planting. This seed treatment also controls cassava mealybug, green spider mite and millipedes. Destroy ant hills and spray them with Agrothion (fenitrothion) 20 at 40 millilitres per 4.5 litres of water, using 9 litres per ant hill. This treatment is for termites and white ants.

Control of variegated grasshopper on cassava. The variegated grasshopper eats cassava leaves and young stems and can completely defoliate the plant. Control it by regular weeding and hand picking, and by spraying the crop and surrounding bush as soon as the first nymphs appear towards the end of September. Control is far more effective if surrounding farmers spray at the same time.

Control of rats, grasscutters and bush fowl on cassava. These vertebrate pests dig up and eat cassava roots. Control them by keeping the farm and surroundings free of weeds, by trapping, by shooting, and by wire fencing around the farm where practicable. No spray is used for vertebrate pests.

Which cassava problems have no chemical cure? Cassava mosaic disease and cassava bacterial blight have no chemical treatment. Both are controlled only by planting resistant varieties and using clean, disease-free planting material. A farmer who buys chemicals to treat mosaic disease or bacterial blight is wasting money.


Cassava bacterial blight has no chemical cure. Do not spray any chemical for cassava bacterial blight. Fungicides such as Bordeaux mixture, Benlate and Dithane M45 do not work on bacterial blight, because blight is caused by bacteria and not by a fungus. Spraying fungicide on bacterial blight wastes money and does not save the crop. Use resistant varieties and clean, disease-free stem cuttings instead.

What chemical should I spray to kill cassava mealybug? The recommended treatment for cassava mealybug is a seed treatment, not a foliar spray. Dip cassava stem cuttings in a chloropyrifos insecticide solution for five minutes at two millilitres per litre of water and allow them to dry before planting. This seed treatment controls cassava mealybug, green spider mite and millipedes. Cassava mealybug is also controlled biologically by releasing its natural enemy, a parasitic wasp, which has been highly successful in reducing mealybug infestation across Africa. Do not use green spider mite foliar sprays such as Rogor or Perfekthion for mealybug, because those are recommended for spider mite only.


Cassava mealybug control and which chemicals to use on cassava mealybug

Cassava mealybug is controlled by seed treatment and by biological control, not by foliar spraying. To control cassava mealybug, dip cassava stem cuttings in a chloropyrifos insecticide solution for five minutes at two millilitres per litre of water, and allow the cuttings to dry before planting. This chloropyrifos seed treatment is the recommended chemical for cassava mealybug. Cassava mealybug is also controlled biologically by releasing a parasitic wasp, its natural enemy, a campaign that greatly reduced cassava mealybug infestation across Africa.

Which chemicals should NOT be used on cassava mealybug: do not spray Rogor, Perfekthion, dimethoate, Supracide, Ultracide, Diazinon, Dasudin, Azodrin or Nuvacron on cassava mealybug. Those foliar sprays are recommended for green spider mite only. Do not spray Bordeaux mixture, Benlate or Dithane M45 on cassava mealybug either, because those are fungicides recommended for cassava leaf spot only, and cassava mealybug is an insect and not a fungus. For cassava mealybug, use the chloropyrifos stem cutting dip before planting, or biological control with the parasitic wasp.
